LC >>
Thanks you very much, Mr Blankfein. We’ve heard in earlier panels today example after example where Goldman was selling securities to people and then not telling them that they we taking and intended to maintain a short position against those same securities. I’m deeply troubled by that. And it’s made worse when your own employees believe that those securities are junk or piece of crap or shitty deal. Billion dollar timber wolf, synthetic CDO squared. CDOs get squared now. Senior executive called it a shitty transaction, but the Goldman sales force was told it was a priority item for two straight months. Goldman sold $600 million in timber wolf securities to clients while at the same time holding a short position. In other words, betting against it. CDO goes to -- with the junk status in about  seven months. Your investors lost big time. But Goldman won on that deal. Profited on that deal. In the $500 million Long Beach RMBS deal, Goldman shorted it the same time it was selling it to clients. Securities defaulted within a few years with a 65% delinquency rate. The bad news, in your own words, was that your clients lose money, but the good news is that Goldman Sachs made money on that deal. The next one, $700 million Fremon deal. Notoriously bad lender. Your folks knew it. One of your clients talks to your sales force about it, and your sales force, among themselves, call it crap loans. They go out and sell them anyway. At the same time that you’re selling -- your people -- your salespeople are selling those items, they are shorting the deal. So you short them so that Goldman makes money when this security fails, which it did in ten months. On the $300 million Anderson synthetic CDO, CDO is stuffed with new century loans. These are known to be shoddy loans. I think it was or two in the list of bad loan producers. A client of yours asked, how did Goldman Sachs get comfortable with this deal? Goldman Sachs, in other words, pointing out that it was New Century. Goldman Sachs didn’t respond and did not say, we’re not comfortable. We’re shorting it. We’re betting against this deal. Asked a direct question with a deal involving those loans? And instead of responding honestly, we got problems too, we’re not taking chances on this deal, we may be selling it, but we’re also betting against it, that’s not what happened. Instead, the client was told  that Goldman was an equity holder which it was at the same time. But that was half the truth.  Because it was also betting against that same security. That CDO failed within seven months. Your client lost. Goldman profits. The $2 billion Hudson synthetic C DRK O. Goldman Sachs was the sole protection buyer on this CDO with a $2 billion short. In other words, they were  betting against it. Goldman salesperson described it as junk. Not to the buyer, of course. But inside. The CDO imploded within two years. Your client lost. Goldman profited. Now there’s such a fundamental conflict, it seems to me, when Goldman is selling securities which particularly when its own people believe they are bad items described in the way these emails show that they were described and how they were -- but what your own salespeople believed about them, to go out and sell these securities to people and then bet against those same securities, it seems to me , is a fundamental conflict of interest, and it raises a real ethical issue. And I’d like to ask whether or not you  believe that Goldman, in fact, treated those clients properly and, as you say, if clients believe we don’t deserve their trust, your not going to  survive . Those are the ringing words you give us in your opening statement. Given that kind of history here, going heavily short in the market, which you did, you made a strategic decision to do that, but then on these specific  examples, to be betting against the very securities which you’re selling to your clients and internally your own people believe that these are crappy securities, how do you expect to deserve the trust of your clients and is there not an inherent conflict here?

BL >> 13:34
Senator, that’s -- there’s a lot in your question.
I’m sure we’re going to spend a lot of time on  different parts of it. 
Our clients’ trust is not only important to us, it’s essential to us. 
It is why we’re as successful firm as we are and have been for 140 years. 
We are one the of the largest client franchises in market making in these kind of activities we’re talking about now. 
And our client base is a pretty critical client base for us. 
And they know our activities ,and they understand what market making is.

LC >>
Do you think they know that you think something is a piece of crap when you sell it to them and then bet against it? Do you think they know that?

BL >> 14:21
Again, I don’t know who “they” is.

LC >> 
We went through it today.

BL >> 14:24
I know senator.
There were individual emails that were picked out and some people thought something. 
But I will tell you --

LC >>
I’m just asking you a question.  Do you think if your people think something is a piece of crap and go out and sell that en then your company bets against it, do you think that that deserves your trust?

BL >> 14:43
Senator I want to make one thing clear. 
When you sell something and then our customer bets against it --

LC >>
No, No, you bet against it. 

BL >> 14:53
We bet against it, we are principals. 
The act of selling something is what gives us the opposite position of what the client has. 
If the client asks us for a bid and we buy it from them, the next minute we own it, they don’t. 
If they ask us to buy it from us, the next minute they own it and we don’t. 
We could cover that risk, but the nature of the principal business and market making is that we are the other side of what our client want to do.

LC >>
When you sell something to a client, they think presumably you’re rid of it. It’s no longer in your inventory.

BL >> 15:32
Not necessarily. 

LC >>
Not necessarily. But they have at least the right to believe that you want that security to work for them. That’s a belief which I would think most customers would have. But here’s what you -- in these -- examples after examples, it’s not just that you sold something, which obviously meant that someone was buying it. There a seller and a buyer. That’s not what we’re talking about. We’re talking about betting against the very thing that you’re selling. Betting against it. Going short against is without disclosing that to that client. Do you think people would buy securities from you if you said, you know, we want you to know this. We’re going to sell you this. But we’re going to a -- going out and buying insurance against this security succeeding. We’re take the short position. We’re getting thing out of our inventory. We’re betting against this very thing we’re selling to you. That’s a totally different thing from selling a security and no longer having an interest in it. My question is, is there not a conflict when you sell something to somebody and then are determined to bet against that same security and you don’t disclose that to the person you’re selling it to? Do you see a problem?

BL >> 16:47
In the context of market making, that is not a conflict. 
What client are buying or customers are buying is they’re buying an exposure. 
The thing that we are selling to them is supposed to give them the risk they want. 
They are not coming to us to find out what our views are. 
They probably -- the institution clients we have wouldn’t care what our views are. 
They shouldn’t care. 
We do other things at the firm. 
We’re advisers, we manage their money. 
There  are parts of the business where we are fiduciaries

LC >>
Thanks the part that’s is confusing to folks. They’re not told not only re you not a fiducicary, you’re betting against the very security you’re selling to them. You don’t disclose that. That’s worse than not being a fiduciary. That’s being in a conflict of interest situation.

BL >> 17:42
We don’t -- I don’t think our clients care or they should care -- 

LC >>
That you’re betting against the security you’re selling them? They don’t care?

BL >> 17:51
You say betting against.

LC >>
Yeah. You’re betting. You’re going short against the security. You’re holding a short position against the very security. I read you over and over and over again. You’re selling securities. Many of which are described as crap by your own sales force internally. Putting that aside for just a moment. We’ll come back to that. That makes it worse. But there’s an inherent conflict when you don’t disclose to your client that this security that you’re buying from us has obviously a short side. But we’re the people who are keeping the short on this one. We’re betting against this one. And you don’t think that’s relevant to a client?

BL >> 16:26
I know that these are -- you know, we live in different contexts. 
This is professional --

LC >>
This is -- let’s just go with a human context.

BL >> 18:35
In a human context, the markets work on transparency with respect to what the item is. 
It doesn’t carry representation just of what a position -- the seller has. 
Just think from buying stock from the New York -- from a stock exchanges of future markets. You don’t even know -- you’re not even supposed to know who’s on the other side. 
You could have the biggest mutual fund in the world selling all its position in something. 
They could hate it. 
You would never know that if you were the buyer of a stock who was selling it or why they were selling it. 
Liquidity in the market demands transparency that the thing is supposed to do what it’s supposed to do. 
The people who were coming to us for risk in the housing market want a security that gave them exposure to the housing market, and that’s what they got. 
The unfortunate thing, and it’s unfortunate, but it doesn’t -- is that the housing market went south very quickly after some of these securities, not all of them, because some of them were done early, but they went. 
And so people lost money on it. But the security itself delivered the specific exposure that client wanted to have.

LC >> 
You don’t believe it’s relevant to a customer of yours that your are selling a security to that you are betting against that same security. You just don’t think it’s relevant and needs to be disclosed. Is that the bottom line?

BL >> 20:08
Yes. And the people who are selling it in our firm wouldn’t even know what the firm’s position is and --

LC >>
Oh , yes, they did. Oh, yes, they did.

BL >> 20:18
Senator, we’ve got 35,000 people and thousands of traders making markets throughout our firm. 
They might have an idea, but they might not have an idea. 
The next day it might be different. 

LC >>
And what do you think, by the way, they have an idea, more than an idea in these cases. But putting that aside. What do you think about selling securities which your own people think are crap. Does that bother you? 

BL >> 20:45
I think they would -- again, as a hypothetical -- 

LC >>
No this is real. We’ve heard it today. We’ve heard it today. this is a hitty tyshitty deal. This is crap,. Four or five examples. What’s your reaction to that?

BL >> 21:00
I think there a lot of opinions about what -- how securities will perform against the market it is in.

LC >>
How about the salesperson?

BL >> 21:11
I think that the investors that we are dealing with on the long side or the short side know what they want to acquire and probably they asked a salesperson his or her opinion, that salesperson owes a duty of honesty. 
But otherwise the salesperson is representing what that security is and what that security -- what the position in that security will accomplish. 
As far as whether something is a weak security going bad, we are selling securities all the time. 
Securities that we ourselves don’t like. It’s just a function of the price in the market. 
I bet some of those securities, and I don’t know specifically, which are the subjects of those comments, can be bought today for a willing buyer and a seller at cents on the dollar. 
As long as people know -- I think there are people making a rational decision today to buy securities for pennies on the dollar because because they think it will go up, and the sellers of those securities are happy to get the pennies because they think they’ll go down. 

LC >>
I understand that We’re talking where you were the seller of the security and you, you, Goldman Sachs, believes it’s a piece of crap. Where you -- No. As part of the deal, I’m talking about this. I’m not talking where you’re selling securities out of your inventory. I understand that. People come to you, buy securities. I’m talking  about where the deal is that you’re selling has you in the short position and intending to keep that position. That’s the deal. And whether there’s not an obligation to disclose to the people you’re selling to in that deal, hey, we, Goldman, we may be selling it to you, but we believe that this thing’s going the other direction. We’re taking the short position. You don’t see any conflict in that.

BL >> 23:08
I think we -- I think in those transactions in which we underwrote, I believe, and I’m not looking -- in fact, I don’t -- my understanding is that that is disclosed, that we can have a short or long position in those securities.

LC >>
And where you take a short position, you think that should be disclosed? Where you’re betting against that same security you’re selling, yes or no, do think it ought to be disclosed or not?

BL >> 23:34
Senator, you keep using the word betting against.

LC >>
yeah.

BL >> 23:44
If somebody bought -- as a market maker --

LC >>
No, just try my question. Just try my question. In a deal where you are selling securities and you are intending to keep the short side of the deal, which is what happened here in a lot of these deals, do you think you have an obligation to tell the person that you’re selling that you are keeping the short position in that deal? That’s my question.

BL >> 24:10
That we’re not going to cover it in the market?

LC >>
That’s correct. Well, no. That you intend to keep that short position. Not forever. It’s your intention to keep that short position.

BL >> 24:18
No. I don’t think we would have to tell them. 
I don’t even know that we would know ourselves what we were going to do. 
Even if we intended --

LC >>
I said where you intend to keep a short position. That’s my question.

BL >> 23:32
I don’t think -- I don’t think we would -- I don’t think we would disclose that.
And I don’t know, again, intention, for a market maker, is a very -- 

LC >>
You’re investing in these securities. This isn’t a market making deal. This is where you have made a decision, strategically , to you -- or not strategically. Forget that. You’ve made a decision to bet against, to take the short side of, a security that you’re selling. And you don’t think there is a moral obligation here? Put aside the legal obligation. You don’t think there’s an obligation to tell the person that you’re betting against that security by maintaining a short position in it? It’s a very straightforward question. 

BL >> 25:17
I don’t think so. 
I’m trying to answer it. 
Or, for that matter, if a client came to us and asked us to buy something from him, and we intended to hold the long position, I don’t think we have an obligation of telling him what our intention is to hold it.

LC >>
That’s not the opposite side from that client. That’s the same side.

BL >> 25:36
No, it’s not. It’s the opposite side.

LC >>
No. You said a client comes to you and wants to sell you something. You decide whether to buy or sell it -- or not. Whether to buy it or not.

BL >> 25:45
Every transaction, senator, and this is -- I think it’s important, and, again, I’m not trying to be resistant. 
We are -- as market maker, we are buying from sellers and selling to buyers.

LC >>
But I’m not saying you’re not selling to anyone else. You are selling to somebody, and you are taking the opposite position. You are betting, you are going out and getting a default swap, however it’s done. You are betting against the very security that you are selling to that person. You don’t see any problems? You don’t see that you have to disclose, when you put together a deal and go looking for people to buy those securities it just adds insult to injury when people think it’s a pile of junk. That adds insult to injury. But the underlying injury is that you have determined that you are going to keep the opposite position from the security that you’re selling to someone. You just don’t see any obligation to disclose that? That seems to be coming through.

BL >> 26:41
I don’t believe there’s a disclosure obligation. 
But as market maker, I’m not sure how a market would work if it was premised on the assumption that the other side of the market cared what your opinion was about the position they were taking.

LC >>
Do they have an opinion -- Do they have a belief that you at least when you’re going out peddling securities that you want that security to succeed? Don’t they have that right to assume that if you’re going out selling securities, that you have a belief that that’s something which would be good for that client?

BL >> 27:16
I think we have to have a belief, and we do have a belief, that if somebody wants and exposure to housing --

LC >> 
You’re out there selling it to them, You’re out there selling these securities. This isn’t someone walking in the door. You’re picking up the phone. You’re calling these people. You don’t tell them you think it’s a piece of shit. You don’t tell them that this is a security which incorporates or in some way references a whole lot of bad stuff in your own inventory. Bad lemens I think the word was called. You’re out there looking around over and over again. We have emails. You’re out there looking around for buyers and stuff. Whether it’s junk or not junk. Where you are betting against what you’re selling. You are intending to keep the opposite side. This isn’t where you’re just selling something from your inventory. This is where you are betting against the very product you are selling. And you’re just not troubled by it. That’s the bottom line, there’s no trouble in your mind -- 

BL >> 28:12
Senator, again I can’t endorse -- I’m sorry. 
I can’t endorse your characterization.

LC >>
It’s a question. Not a characterization. I’m saying that you’re not troubled.

BL >> 28:22
I’m not troubled by the fact that we market make as principal and at the opposite end when somebody sells to us or when they buy, they buy from us.

LC >>
And where you are betting, keeping a betting interest against the security, it’s not just that they’re buying from you. That’s not the issue. They’re buying something from you where you solicit them to buy and then are betting against, you are keeping the short side, you are going out and getting a default swap and some way you’re going on the ABX, selling the ABX, whatever it is, you are taking a position against the very security that you are selling, and you are not troubled?

BL >> 29:03
Senator again -- 

LC >>
You want people to trust you?

BL >> 29:07
Senator I think people --

LC >>
Why would people -- I won’t trust you. If you came to me and wanted to sell me securities and you didn’t tell me that you have a bet against that security, you don’t think that affect my thinking?

BL >> 29:23
Senator, we could do a public issue of an oil company tomorrow. 
An IPO of an oil company that goes out and searches for oil. 
When we sell that company, and as an underwriter we make sure there’s due diligence because our obligations as underwriter there’s disclosure and due diligence and it’s very well established. 
But we can tell our investors, if they want exposure to an oil company and they understand the risks and we do a good job in diligence and we do all the disclosure required by ourselves and all the regulators, we can sell that security and we will not necessarily disclose and won’t even know, and the buyer won’t care, we could be negative on the equity market and negative on the oil market. 
It still won’t matter.

LC >> 
Mr. Blankfein, stick to the point. I’m talking about that security that you’re selling out there. You go out and sell that security. Oil security, I don’t care what kind it is. And you are betting against that same security you’re selling. I just got to keep repeating this, I’m not talking about generally in the market. I’m saying you’ve got a short bet against that security. You don’t think that the client would care?

BL >> 30:38
I don’t -- Senator, I can’t speak to what people would care. 
I would say that the obligations of a market maker are to make sure your clients are suitable and to make sure -- we are a part of a market process. 
We do hundreds of thousands if not millions of transactions a day as a market maker.

LC >>
This is much more that a market maker. You’re keeping in proprietary interest a position exactly opposite of what you’re selling. We’re going round and round on this. I don’t think we’re going to get an answer from you basically that you have any kind of concern about that situation. Senator McCain.

MJ >>
Thank you for being here, Mr Blankfein. Would you agree that the financial crisis that has brought on the greatest recession since the great depression was due to a collapse of the housing market?

BL >> 31:33
I think it was a number of factors. 
I don’t know whether that was the initial factor, but that certainly was a major, major episode in the collapse.

MJ >>
And you involvement in the housing market is not in the direct mortgage business?

BL >> 31:52
Correct.

MJ >>
And you received $10 billion as part of T.A.R.P.?

BL >> 32:00
We -- an investment was made into Goldman Sachs, yes.

MJ >>
And why did you think you needed that money?

BL >> 32:09
We were part of a group of banks that -- that were brought in and at the same time were -- had an investment made in by the government in order to stabilize what was a -- maybe it’s too strong a word. 
Maybe not. 
A panic of sorts that caused a lack of confidence -- 

MJ >>
But you didn’t make any direct home loan mortgage?

MJ >>
But since it was a housing market collapse, you needed $10 billion. And you recovered nicely, I guess. I guess you declared earnings for 2009 of some $13 billion is -- is that correct? Roughly?

BL >> 33:07
I don’t know the exact number. 
But that would be in the ballpark.

MJ >>
And your bonus was?

BL >> 33:12
About $9 million.

MJ >>
About $9 million. And you’re doing pretty well this year, too, according to your earnings and your stock? Doing pretty well this year?

BL >> 33:34
Financially yes.

MJ >>
How do you think the community banks are doing, Mr Blankfein? I think they’re doing pretty poorly. They’re being closed all the the time. They’re the ones that make the loans for the  mortgages. Think they’re doing okay, the community banks? 

BL >> 33:59
I think there’s a -- the recession --  well, whether or not the recession has ended, the consequences of it still grinds on and is creating a substantial hardship.

MJ >> 
But Goldman’s doing pretty well? And one of the reason’s obviously, why Goldman’s doing pretty well, before they got the $10 billion or T.A.R.P. money, of taxpayers’ money, there was a November 2007 e-mail from you that stated, quote, of course we didn’t dodge the mortgage mess. we lost money then we made more than we lost shorts. That’s a quote from your e-mail that you wrote. How much did you make, more that you lost, because of shorts?

LB >> 34:53
In residential -- in this market, in residential housing, we made, for the entire year of 2007, less than $500 million of revenue, out of the succeeding year of the housing crisis, 2008, we lost $1.7 billion. 
We did not make -- we did not make big money. 
What I was referring to in my e-mail was that -- and this was on the back of a message that was looking at part of our business, and saying they made a lot of money on shorts, when I knew that we had a lot of longs and a lot of shorts that netted to very very small position as our goal during this period was just to manage our risk down.

 MJ >>
You know, Mr. Blankfein, there’s a lot of animosity out there, I’m sure you have seen that, and we find, in my state for example, there’s 48% of the homes are still under water, in other words, they’re worth less, as you know, than the payments that are being made. And the community banks continue to struggle and have great difficulties. You received $10 billion in T.A.R.P. money and the community banks are the ones that are going under. Maybe you could -- do you think that that in the minds of a lot of Americans, that’s there a real contradiction there. You’re doing fine, you’re paid perhaps you earn them, I’m not qualified to say that. Meanwhile , community bank, the ones who are the direct lenders in the housing market, the direct involvement the ones that -- not you, but that the homeowners relied on, are the ones that are struggling and still having enormous difficulty, including my home state of Arizona. Do you see? Do you understand why people might think there’s a dichotomy there, Mr. Blankfein, even unfairness even there? I understand that life isn’t fair, but a lot of Americans don’t quite understand what went on there, don’t understand what hit them.

BL >> 37:17
Absolutely. I think community banks play a very, very important role. 
They are not necessarily -- again, not knowing in general -- not speaking generally or specifically, maybe some helped to author their own situation by overlending or making imprudent judgments, but I’m sure for many, they just conducted their social purpose and lent out money against housing. 
The people who owe them the money can’t pay it back and the housing they have as collateral goes down in value. They may very well be victim of the recession, and that’s -- I can understand -- and I share your concern for the situation.

MJ >>
And I know you’re not a charitable organization, I know why you’re in business, but has Goldman Sachs done anything to help these community banks struggling to make their mortgage payments?

BL >> 38:18
Senator we have --

MJ >>
You did get $10 dollars of the taxpayers’ money.

BL >> 38:27
Yes we did. 
I mentioned in my opening statement, the disposition of that. 
The return and return with a high rate of return for the taxpayer. 
We understand our obligations don’t end here. 
We have always been philanthropic organization. 
We don’t ted -- we sometimes are in visible. 
I would say in the last year, ‘09, we allocated, and I don’t mean just accrued, we delivered a billion dollars of the firm’s funds to philanthropy, including $500 million to a program to support small businesses, by giving education to small business, from the medium and delivery mechanism of community colleges, and with a view to providing finance for some of the graduates of the programs that we have for those small businessmen in order to make them bigger businessmen. 
And to involve our people with it. 
This is -- I’m not -- you know, are any of these things enough? 
Not for the suffering existing in the world, but we are -- we are trying to do our part. 
We think in the main conduct of our business, we are also doing important things for the capital markets. 
We do take accounts of the communities and institutions we normally don’t reach as Goldman Sachs.

MJ >>
What about community banks? Any involvement with them?

BL >> 39:56
I just don’t know.

MJ >>
Explain perhaps for the benefit of the committee and the record, what is a synthetic CDO?

BL >> 40:10
A CDO.

MJ >>
A synthetic CDO.

BL >> 40:15
I was going to build to it. 
A CDO is a pool of assets. 
In this case mortgage assets, mortgage that are pooled together and then can be sliced in a way that will yield a particular credit exposure. 
The reason why one would want to pool mortgages is it gives diversification, so you can pool mortgages, not from just one community but distribute it over the whole country. 
The reason one would want to slice it, is  so you can pick your place on the credit spectrum and say, I’d like the more senior mortgages, I’d like the more junior risks. 
In a synthetic, you don’t pool the actual mortgages, per se, you pool reference securities that are indexed to specific pools of mortgages.

MJ >>
In other words, you really don’t -- a synthetic CDO, you don’t really have any ownership, you’re just betting on the fortunes of that CDO, is that correct?

LB >> 41:25
Yes, you’re doing it in a way to get specific risk in a specific place, at a specific spectra, level of the spectrum, without necessarily having to assemble the particular securities, and so you can do it more quickly and you can do it more precisely.

MJ >>
How does that differ from going out to Cesar’s Palace, the sport book, and making a wager on the outcome of an athletic contest?

LB >> 41:55
I think the people who are participating in the CDO market are specifically trying to take particular risks, with respect to the housing market, short or long, and presumably, they want to take that to either initiate that exposure, or to use that exposure to help hedge themselves or to adjust their risk profile, in the case of somebody who already has an accumulated risk. 